#Impact of swine influenza vaccination on virus reassortment and genetic diversity

Influenza A viruses (IAV) are critical zoonotic pathogens and one of the most prevalent respiratory pathogens that cause substantial production losses in pigs. Although influenza vaccination is widely used in pigs to control the impact of the disease, IAV continues to evolve rapidly, resulting in the emergence of multiple H1 and H3 IAV lineages in pigs in the last 20 years. The high diversity of IAVs found in pigs due in part to the ability of the virus to mutate and reassort, can result in novel variants with antigenic characteristics that facilitate virus escape from the host immunity posing a challenge for vaccine development. To our knowledge there are no studies that investigate how vaccination affects IAV mutation and reassortment simultaneously in pigs. Here, we performed IAV whole-genome sequencing directly on 28 bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) samples from pigs receiving distinct vaccination protocols including a) prime boost, b) single live attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV), or c) no vaccine. After vaccination, pigs were challenged with an H1N1 and an H3N2 virus simultaneously using a seeder pig model. Plaque assays to identify IAV reassortants in pigs were performed in 13 BALF samples yielding a total of 202 IAV plaques recovered from 13 pigs. Approximately, 27% (54/202) of the plaques were identified as reassortants grouped in 16 distinct genotypes and 18 mixed genotypes. The prime-boost vaccination protocol significantly reduced the emergence of new reassortant viruses by reducing the duration of co-infection with the H1 and H3 subtypes. In contrast, vaccination did not appear to affect IAV HA diversity, evolutionary rates, and nucleotide polymorphisms in swine lower respiratory tracts. Even though there were abundant functional relevant amino acid changes in the H1 and H3 subtypes recovered from pigs regardless of vaccination statuses, none of the changes were associated with HA antigenic or receptor binding properties. Moreover, there was limited shared amino acid changes in H1N1 and H3N2 viruses in pigs from all three groups. Our study suggests that vaccination should be explored as a measure to mitigate the emergence of IAV reassortment in pigs. However, more research is needed to assess the impact of vaccination on the emergence of reassortant viruses under field conditions.
